======================================================================
=    Notes on Hooker's Of the Laws of Ecclesiastical Polity
=
=  lable: 
=    e.g. 0.1.1 means Preface, section 1, sentence 1
=    e.g. 2.1.3 means book II, section 1, sentence 3
======================================================================

==============
Preface

==============
Preface I.1

>> 0.1.1
Though for no other cause,
yet for this,
    that posterity may know 
        we have not loosely through silence permitted things to pass away 
            as in a dream,
        there shall be 
            for men's information 
        extant thus much concerning 
            the present state of the Church of God established amongsth us,
            and their careful endeavour 
                which would have upheld the same.

though: (conj.)
OED B.II.2.a. Introducing a subordinate clause expressing a supposition or
possibility: Even if; even supposing that; granting that. b. With ellipsis.

for: (prep.)
OED VII.21 Because of, on account of.

no: (adj.)
OED 3.a. Modifying an adjective and singular noun and negating the adjective
rather than the whole noun phrase (usually implying that an adjective of an
opposite meaning would be more correct or appropriate).

other: (adj.)
OED 5. Existing besides, or distinct from, that already mentioned or implied;
not this, not the same, different in identity; further, additional.
5.b with sing. n. qualifed by an, any, some, no, or preceded by a negative
expressed or implied.

cause: (n.)
OED 3.a. A fact, condition of matters, or consideration, moving a person to
action; ground of action; reason for action, motive.

yet: (adv.)
OED A.III.10. In spite of that, for all that, (but) nevertheless. Sometimes 
strengthened by nevertheless, notwithstanding, and often correlative to though. 
Yet, in this sense, is similar in meaning to but conj. 11b; however it is more 
emphatic and freer in construction, and may be preceded by and or but. This 
sense of yet is nearly equivalent to STILL adv. 6b; but still indicates mainly 
that the fact or condition remains unaltered by the adverse one, whereas yet 
usually indicates that it is in some degree surprising or unexpected.

for: (prep.)
OED VII.21 Because of, on account of.

this: (pron.)
OED I.1.d Pointing to a statement, proposal, or question which immediately
follows.

that: (conj.)
OED I.1.a. Introducing a dependent substantive-clause, as subject, object, or
other element of the principal clause, or as complement of a n. or adj., or in
apposition with a n. therein.

posterity:
OED 2.b. All succeeding generations (collectively).

may: (v.)
OED 7. Expressing present subjective possibility, i.e. the admissibility 
of a supposition, in a direct or indirect statement.
a. In relation to the future and in general predictions (I may be or do 
= 'it is possible that I will be' or 'do').

know:
OED 11. To be aware or apprised of (something, typically a fact expressed 
propositionally), esp. through observation, inquiry, or information. In early 
use sometimes: to get to understand, to find out, learn (obsolete).
a. transitive. With an indirect statement. (a) With clause as object, usually 
introduced by that. Sometimes (now only in passive) with it (or that) followed 
by that-clause.

we:
OED 1.d. Used indefinitely in general statements in which the speaker or writer 
includes those addressed, i.e. his or her contemporaries, compatriots, fellow 
human beings, etc.
[It is unclear what does Hooker mean by we here.]

have:
OED VI. As an auxiliary verb, used with the past participle of another verb 
to form the perfect. 30. With a transitive verb.

not:
OED A.I.4. Negating verbs. Following an auxiliary verb (and to have whether 
auxiliary or not).

loosely:
OED 2. Without care, strictness, or rigour; not strictly, carelessly,
negligently, laxly. Said esp. of thought or its expression.

through: (prep.)
OED III.12.a. By means of; by the intermediate agency of; with the aid of; 
via. In early use also: †by the primary agency or action of (obsolete).

silence:
OED 1.a. The fact of abstaining or forbearing from speech or utterance
(sometimes with reference to a particular matter); the state or condition
resulting from this; muteness, reticence, taciturnity. Occa. with a or in pl.

permitted <permit: (v.)
OED 3.a. Transitive. To allow or give consent to (a person or thing) to do or 
undergo something. Chiefly with infinitive.

things <thing:
OED 3.a. That with which one is concerned (in action, speech, or thought); an
affair, business, concern, matter, subject; pl. affairs, concerns, matters. (In
early use sometimes sing. in collective sense.)

to: (prep.)
OED B. before an infinitive. I. With infinitive in adverbial relation. 1.a.
(Indicating purpose or intention) Dependent on a verb, to with inf. = in order
to; equivalent to that or in order that with subjunctive, or to for or for the
purpose of with gerund.
The implied subject of the inf. may be either a subject or an object of the
principal clause.

pass away <pass:
OED PV1.a. intransitive. Of a thing: to cease to exist; to perish or disappear; 
to be dissolved.

as: (conj.)
OED B.II.6.a. With the subordinate clause consisting only of an adverbial or 
complement: in the same way as, as if, as it were.

in:
OED 8. With non-physical realms, regions of thoughts, departments of faculties
of the mind, spheres of action, etc., treated as having extension or content.

a:
indefinite article

dream: (n.2)
OED A.1.a. A series of images, thoughts, and emotions, often with a story-like 
quality, generated by mental activity during sleep; the state in which this 
occurs. Also: a prophetic or supernatural vision experienced when either 
awake or asleep.

there:
OED B.4. Used unemphatically to introduce a sentence or clause in which, for the
sake of emphasis or preparing the hearer, the verb comes before its subject, as
there comes a time when, etc., there was heard a rumbling noise. In
interrogative sentences there comes between the verb and subject, as Breathes
there the man, etc., or follows the first word of a compound verb, as Does there
breathe a man?, Shall there be any notice taken of it? The same order was
formerly observed after an introductory adv. or clause, as Then came there a
voice, Soon shall there arise a prophet.
d. especially with the verb to be: cf. BE B.1, 1b, 5b. there is, there are, are
equivalent to F. il est, il y a, Ger. es ist, est sind, es giebt, Sp. hay.

shall:
OED B.5 In commands or instructions. b. In the third person.

be:
OED I. Without required complement: To have or take place in the world of 
fact, to exist, occur, happen.

for:
OED 21. Because of, on account of: c. On account of one's regard for. So in for
the sake of, used synonymously with for in this sense and in senses A.7, A.8.

men's <man:
OED I.1. A human being.
b. As a general or indefinite designation, esp. with determiners such as
every, any, no, etc., and in plural, esp. with all, any, some, many, few, etc.:
a person.

information:
OED I.1.a. The shaping of the mind or character; communication of instructive
knowledge; education, training; advice (obsolete).

extant:
OED A.2. Standing forth to view; in early use, with phrase extant to the sight,
to be seen: prominent, conspicuous, manifest. Now arch. rare.

thus much <thus:
OED 3. Qualifying an adj. or adv.: To this extent, number, or degree; as .. as
this; so; esp. thus far, to this point (often used to indicate the end of a
quotation); thus much, so much, as much as this.

concerning: (prep.)
OED 1.a. As regards; as relates to. Chiefly in as concerning: as far as
concerns; as to.

the: (adj.)
OED A.I Definite article (determiner). Refering to an individual item (or
items).

present: (adj.)
OED II.6. Existing or occuring now; that is or is so at this time; current,
contemporary; in use or vogue at this time, modern. Opposed to past and future.

state: (n.)
OED I.1.a. The combination of circumstances or attributes belonging at a
particular time to a person or thing; a particular manner or way of existing as
defined by the presence of certain circumstances or attributes; a condition.
Frequently with of.

of: (prep.)
OED VIII. Indicating the subject matter of thought, feeling, or action.
26. Following nouns. Now chiefly limited to nouns of knowing, narrating,
informing, and the like.

the:
OED 4. Before a noun denoting one of a class of persons, things, events, etc.,
used to indicate a particular instance that is most relevant in the context.
When the word denotes a person, thing, event, etc., of public importance it
assumes something of the character of a proper name, and is often written with a
capital letter, eg. the Queen, the Lord Mayor, the Town, the House, the Court,
the Tower, the Abbey, the River, the Channel, the Flood, the Reformation, the
Revolution, the Englightenment.

Church:
OED 6. Frequently (esp. in later use) with capital initial. a. Chiefly with the.
The ecclesiastical and clerical organization of Christianity, or of a particular
large body of Christians (such as a nation or denomination), as exercising
religious authority and upholding ecclesiastical law. Also: the clergy and
officials of this organization collectively or as a corporation owning property,
collecting dues, etc., and (esp. in early use) as an estate of the realm.
In this sense the Church is sometimes opposed to the State or the political
organization, the civil government.

of:
OED 35.a. Belonging to a person or thing, as something that he, she, or it has
or possesses (=the possessive genitive, and akin to the subjective, sense 15).

God:
OED 5. Especially in Judaism, Christianity, and Islam: the Supreme Being,
regarded as the creator and ruler of the universe.

established: <establish(v.)
OED 7. From 16th century often used with reference to ecclesiastical ceremonies
or organization, and to the recognized national church or its religion; in early
use chiefly passive in sense 2 (esp. in phrase by law established, i.e.
'prescribed or settled by law'), but sometimes with mixture of sense 3-5. Hence
in recent use: To place (a church or a religious body) in the position of a
national or state church.

amongst:
OED 6. = among prep.7,8
Of the relation of joint action to the various actors: By the joint action of.

us:
OED A. pron. The objective case of the first personal plural pronoun WE pron.,
representing the old English accusative and dative.

and: (conj.)
OED A.I. Coordinating. Introducing a word, phrase, clause, or sentence, which is
to be taken side by side with, along with, or in addition to, that which
precedes it.
7. Connecting coordinate clauses or sentences. a. Simple connective.

their:
OED 3. As antecedent to a following relative clause, equivalent to 'of those'.
Now rare.

careful:
OED 7.b Showing care, done or performed with care.

endeavour:
OED 1.a. The action of endeavouring; effort, or pains, directed to attain an
object; a strenuous attempt or enterprise.

which:
OED 8.a Introducing a clause defining or restricting the antecedent and thus
completing the sense. Regularly so used after the antecedent that, or after a
preposition; in other cases the more regular relative is that.

would <will:
OED. 42.a. In the apodosis of a conditional sentence (expressed or implied), in
the 2nd or 3rd persons, expressing merely a possibility or contingency in the
supposed case.

have:
OED II. As an auxiliary verb. As in the other Germanic (and Romanic) languages,
the various moods and tenses of have are used with the past participle of
another verb, to form a series of compound or 'perfect' tenses of the latter,
expressing action already finished at the time indicated, and answering to the
Latin perfect tneses dedi, dederam, dedero, dedisse, etc.

upheld <uphold:
OED 2.a. To support, sustain, maintain, by aid or assistance; to preserve
unimpaired or intact.

the: (adj.)
OED A.I Definite article (determiner). Refering to an individual item (or
items). b. Placed before pronouns and determiners.

same: (pron.)
OED B.2.a. The same thing.Formerly also that same, this same.
cf. A.2.a With backward reference: Identical with what has been indicated.


Simon says:
(1) This evocation of prosperity is somewhat unexpected as Hooker is supposed to
address the puritans directly.
(2) "through silence" may also complement "pass away", as "we have not loosely
permitted things to pass away [through silence] as in a dream".
(3) "the same" refers to "the Church of God established amongst us".

Paraphrase:
[I write for many causes.] Even if for no other cause, yet I still write for
this cause: that ...


==============
Preface I.2

>> 0.1.2
At your hands,
    beloved in our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ,
    (for in him the love 
	     which we bear unto all 
             that would but seem to be born of him,
    it is not the sea of your gall and bitterness that shall ever drown,)
I have no great cause to look for other than the selfsame portion and lot
    which your manner hath been to lay on them
        that concur not in opinion and sentence with you.

at: (prep.)
OED 11. Determining the source from which anything comes, and at which we seek
it: eg. To ask, inquire, seek, learn, take, get, obtain, find, have, receive,
buy, earn, win, suffer, at. Obsolete or dialect (repl. by of, from) except in
(b.) the expanded phrases at the mouth or at the hands of.

your: (adj.)
OED B. adj. The possessive adjective corresponding to ye, you.
1.a. Belonging or relating to the person or people being addressed; which you
have, hold, or possess.

hands <hand:
OED P1.a.(b) at the hand(s) of, at a person's hand(s). (i) From the hands of;
from. Used to express the immediate source, after such verbs as receive, take,
find, seek, require, etc. (see AT prep.11). Now somewhat rare.

beloved: (n.)
OED B. A person who is (dearly) loved, a loved one; (also) beloved people as a
class. Frequently with possessive adjective.

in:
OED 23. In spiritual or mystical union with.
 
our: (adj.)
OED B.1. Belonging to or associated with the speaker and one or more other
people prviously mentioned or easily identified; belonging to or associated with
people in general.

Lord:
OED 6.b. (A title or name for) Jesus. Frequently with the. Also in Lord Jesus
(Christ) or Lord Christ.

and: (conj.)
OED A.I. Coordinating. Introducing a word, phrase, clause, or sentence, which is
to be taken side by side with, along with, or in addition to, that which
precedes it.

Saviour:
OED 1.a. God or (more usually) Christ, conceived of as offering salvation to
mankind and redemption from sin. Frequently with our, the. In later use chiefly
with capital initial.

Jesus:

Christ:
OED 2.a. The title given to Jesus of Nazareth, as embodying the fulfilment of
Messianic prophecy and expectation; since the earliest Christian times treated
as a proper name.

for: (conj.)
OED B.1. Introducing the cause of a fact, the statement of which precedes or
follows.

in:
OED 23. In spiritual or mystical union with.

him: (pron.)
OED A. The objective case of the masculine third person singular pronoun,
corresponding to the subjective HE pron. (in original use as a dative also to IT
pron.)

the:
OED A.I Definite article (determiner). Refering to an individual item (or
items).

love:
OED 2. In religious use: the benevolence and affection of God towards an
individual or towards creation; (also) the affectionate devotion due to God from
an individual; regard and consideration of one human being towards another
prompted by a sense of a common relationship to God. 

which:
OED 8.a Introducing a clause defining or restricting the antecedent and thus
completing the sense. Regularly so used after the antecedent that, or after a
preposition; in other cases the more regular relative is that.

we:
OED 1.d. Used indefinitely in general statements in which the speaker or writer 
includes those addressed, i.e. his or her contemporaries, compatriots, fellow 
human beings, etc.

bear:
OED I. To carry; with its transferred and figurative senses. 2.a. fig. Said in
reference to things immaterial, or to ideal carrying.

unto: (prep.)
OED A.I.1. Expressing or denoting motion directed towards and reaching (a place,
point, or goal); 

all: (pron.)
OED B.I.1.a. As the antecedent to a relative clause introduced by that, what
(now nonstandard), or zero relative pronoun: every one of the things or people
specified; all the parts or elements of the specified thing; everything or
everyone. Usually with singular agreement except when referring to people.

that: (pron.2)
OED I.1.a. Introducing a clause defining or restricting the antecedent, and thus
complete its sense. (The ordinary use: referring to persons or things.)

would <will:
OED. 42.a. In the apodosis of a conditional sentence (expressed or implied), in
the 2nd or 3rd persons, expressing merely a possibility or contingency in the
supposed case.

but: (adv.)
OED B.2. Limiting a word or phrase. a. Nothing but, no more than, only, merely.
Now somewhat literally.

seem:
OED 4. With infinitive: To appear to be or to do something.

to:
OED B.I. With infinitive in adverbial relation.

be:
OED IV.16. With past participle. a. In transitive verbs, forming the passive
voice.

born <bear:
OED IV.42. To bring forth, produce, yield.
 
of:
OED III.8.a. Expressing ancestral or local origin, descent, etc.: following
arise, be, come, descend, spring, etc.; be born, be bred, be derived, be
propagated, etc.

him: (pron.)
OED A. The objective case of the masculine third person singular pronoun,
corresponding to the subjective HE pron. (in original use as a dative also to IT
pron.)

it:
OED A.I.1. The thing previously mentioned, implied, or easily identified.
a. As subject or subject complement.

is <be:
OED III. With adjective, noun, or adjective phrase, acting as simple copula:
stating of what sort or what something is. Frequently in general statements and
questions with it as non-specific, non-referentia, or existential subject.
9. To exist as the subject of some predicate; to have membership of a class of
things distinguished by a specified quality or name.

not:
OED A.I.4. Negating verbs. Following an auxiliary verb (and to have whether 
auxiliary or not).

the:
OED A.I Definite article (determiner). Refering to an individual item (or
items).

sea:
OED 7. figurative. With reference to metaphorical sailing, drowning, waves,
etc.; also, a copious or overwhelming quantity or mass (of something).

of:
OED 20. Following a noun, connecting the material immediately with the thing.

your:
OED B. adj. The possessive adjective corresponding to ye, you.

gall:
OED I.1.b. figurative. With reference to the bitterness of gall. to dip one's
pen in gall, to write with virulence and rancour.

and:
OED A. conj. I. Coordinating. Introducing a word, phrase, clause, or sentence,
which is to be taken side by side with, along with, or in addition to, that
which precedes it.

bitterness:
OED The quality of state of being bitter: b. to the mind or feelings.

that: (pron.2)
OED I.1.a. Introducing a clause defining or restricting the antecedent, and thus
complete its sense. (The ordinary use: referring to persons or things.)

shall:
OED 8. As a mere auxiliary, forming (with present infinitive) the future, and
(with perfect infinitive) the future perfect tense.
a. In Old English sceal, while retaining its primary sense, served as a
tense-sign in announcing a future event as fated or divinedly decreed. Hence
shall has always been the auxiliary used, in all persons, for prophetic or
oracular announcements of the future, and for solemn assertions of the certainty
of a future event.

ever: (adv.)
OED 5.a. At any time; (hence) on any occasion; in any circumstances.

drown:
OED 6.a. transferred and figurative. To overwhelm, to overpower, by rising above
like a flood; to immerse or smother; to overpower (sound) by greater loudness.

paraphrase:
it [i.e. the love] is not [anything] that the sea of your gall and bitterness shall ever drown


==============
Preface I.3

>> 0.1.3
But our hope is,
    that the God of peace shall,
        (notwithstanding man's nature too impatient of contumelious
        malediction,)
    enable us quietly even gladly to suffer all things,
        for that work sake 
            which we covet to perform.

but: (conj.)
OED 12. In an independent clause within a compound sentence (usually after a
semicolon or colon), or a the beginning of a following sentence.
a. Introducing a statement of the nature of an exception, objection, limitation,
or contrast to what has gone before: however, on the other hand, moreover, yet.

our: (adj.)
OED B.1. Belonging to or associated with the speaker and one or more other
people prviously mentioned or easily identified; belonging to or associated with
people in general.

hope:
OED 2. Feeling of trust or confidence. Obsolete except as biblical archaism.

is <be:
OED III. With adjective, noun, or adjective phrase, acting as simple copula:
stating of what sort or what something is. Frequently in general statements and
questions with it as non-specific, non-referentia, or existential subject.
9. To exist as the subject of some predicate; to have membership of a class of
things distinguished by a specified quality or name.

that: (conj.)
OED I.1.a. Introducing a subordinate noun clause, as subject, object, or other
element of the principal clause, or as complement of a n. or adj., or in
apposition to a n. therein.

the:
OED 4. Before a noun denoting one of a class of persons, things, events, etc.,
used to indicate a particular instance that is most relevant in the context.
When the word denotes a person, thing, event, etc., of public importance it
assumes something of the character of a proper name, and is often written with a
capital letter, eg. the Queen, the Lord Mayor, the Town, the House, the Court,
the Tower, the Abbey, the River, the Channel, the Flood, the Reformation, the
Revolution, the Englightenment.

God:
OED 6. A being such as is understood by the name of 'God'; a sole divine creator
and ruler of the universe.
c. Chiefly with of. Such a being as associated with or embodying a particular
quality (as the God of love, the God of mercy, the God of vengeance, etc.) or
sphere of life or action (as the God of nature, the God of revelation, the God
of providence), or as conceived of in a specified religion or system of thought
(as the God of philosophy, the God of pantheism, the God of Judaism).

of: (prep.)
OED 47. Indicating a quality possessed by the subject.

peace:
OED 8. A person who embodies or fosters peace, harmony, concord, etc.

shall:
OED 8. As a mere auxiliary, forming (with present infinitive) the future, and
(with perfect infinitive) the future perfect tense.
a. In Old English sceal, while retaining its primary sense, served as a
tense-sign in announcing a future event as fated or divinedly decreed. Hence
shall has always been the auxiliary used, in all persons, for prophetic or
oracular announcements of the future, and for solemn assertions of the certainty
of a future event.

notwithstanding:
OED A. prep. In spite of. 1. With simple prepositional object.

man's <man:
OED I.1. A human being.
b. As a general or indefinite designation, esp. with determiners such as
every, any, no, etc., and in plural, esp. with all, any, some, many, few, etc.:
a person.

nature:
OED III. Senses relating to innate character.
7.a. More fully human nature. The basic character or disposition of mankind;
humanity, humanness. Also: this character or disposition thought of as fallible
or flawed; (in later use) an action or pattern of behaviour that typifies or
results from such a fallible character or disposition.

too: (adv.)
OED II.2.a. gen. In excess of what ought to be; more than is right or fitting.

impatient of <impatient:
OED A. adj. 
1.b. With of: Unable or unwilling to endure or put up with; intolerant of.

contumelious: (adj.)
OED 1.a. Of words and actions: Of the nature of, or full of contumely;
reproachful and tending to convey disgrace and humiliation; despiteful.
        
malediction: (n.)
OED 1.a. A curse; the utterance of a curse; the condition of being under a ban
or curse.

enable: (v.)
OED 3.c. To supply with the requisite means or opportunities to an end or for an
object. Const. to with infinitive.

us: 
OED A. pron. The objective case of the first personal plural pronoun WE pron.,
representing the Old English accusative and dative.

quietly:
OED 1. In a quiet manner (in various senses of the adjective); peacefully,
meekly; with little or no noise, fuss, or disturbance; surreptitiously, without
attracting attention.

even: 
OED 8.a.(b) Introducing an adverbial clause expressing time, manner, place, or
any attendant circumstance, indicating that the specified circumstances
constitute an extreme or surprising case.

gladly: 
OED 1.a. In a glad fashion; with gladness or joy. Also, in a weaker sense,
willingly, with alcrity.

to:
OED B.I. With infinitive in adverbial relation.

suffer:
OED I.1. transitive. To have (something painful, distressing, or injurious)
inflicted or imposed upon one; to submit to with pain, distress, or grief.

all:
OED 2. With a plural noun, a plural personal or anaphoric pronoun, or a noun
phrase or collective noun with plural agreement. The whole number of individual
components or instances of, without exception; the entire number of.

things <thing:
OED 3.a. A matter with which one is concerned (in action, speech, or thought);
an affair, a business, a conern, a subject. Now usually in plural: affairs,
matters, circumstances.

for:
see sake below.

that:
OED B. adj. Demonstrative determiner.
1.a. The simple demonstrative used (as adjective in concord with a n.), to
indicate a thing or person either as being actually pointed out or present, or
as having just been mentioned and being thus mentally pointed out.

work (n.):
OED I.1.a. An act, deed, or proceeding; something that is in the process of
being, or has been, done or performed.

sake:
OED II. for the sake of (also for sake of); for (one's, a thing's) sake.
7.a. Out of regard or consideration for (a thing); on account of, because of
(something regarded in the light of an end, aim, purpose, etc.); often = out of
desire for, in order to attain, etc.

which:
OED 8.a Introducing a clause defining or restricting the antecedent and thus
completing the sense. Regularly so used after the antecedent that, or after a
preposition; in other cases the more regular relative is that.

we:
OED 1.d. Used indefinitely in general statements in which the speaker or writer 
includes those addressed, i.e. his or her contemporaries, compatriots, fellow 
human beings, etc.

covet (v.):
OED 1. transitive. To desire; esp. to desire eagerly, to wish for, long for.

to:
OED B.I. With infinitive in adverbial relation.

perform: (v.)
OED I.1. transitive. a. To carry out in action, execute, or fulfil (a command,
request, undertaking, threat, etc.); to carry into effect, discharge (a service,
duty, etc.).

>> 0.1.4
The wonderful zeal and fervour
    wherewith ye have withstood the received order of this church,
was the first thing 
    which caused me to enter into consideration,
    whether,
        as all your published books and writings peremptorily maintain,
    every Christian man,
        fearing God,
    stand bound to join with you for the furtherance of that
        which ye term the Lord's discipline.

the:
OED A.I Definite article (determiner). Refering to an individual item (or
items).

wonderful:
OED A. adj. 1.a. Full of wonder; such as to excite wonder or astonishment;
marvellous; sometimes used trivially = surprisingly large, fine, excellent, etc.

zeal: (n.)
OED 2. Passionate enthusiasm for or dedication to a cause, belief, undertaking,
etc.; vehement, eager, or dedicated pursuit of an objective. Also with
disparaging implication: excessive or immoderate enthusiasm, devotion, or
fevour. Frequently with for; formerly also with of, to, unto, etc.

and:
OED A. conj. I. Coordinating. Introducing a word, phrase, clause, or sentence,
which is to be taken side by side with, along with, or in addition to, that
which precedes it.

fervour:
OED 2. Warmth or glow of feeling, passion, vehemence, intense zeal; an instance
of the same.

wherewith:
OED II. relative. With which.

ye:
OED A. pron. The subjective case of the second person plural pronoun. Now
archaic or regional.

have:
OED VI. As an auxiliary verb, used with the past participle of another verb 
to form the perfect. 30. With a transitive verb.

withstood <withstand:
OED 1.a. transitive. To stand or maintain one's or its position against; to
offer resistance to, resist, oppose: often with implication that the resistance
is successful or effectual.

the: 
OED A.I Definite article (determiner). Refering to an individual item (or
items).

received: (adj.)
OED 1.a. Generally adopted, accepted, or approved as true, authritative, or
standard. Frequently in received opinion, received wisdom.

order: 
OED I.2.a. A grade or rank in the Christian ministry, or in an ecclesiastical
hierarchy.

of:
OED 35.a. Belonging to a person or thing, as something that he, she, or it has
or possesses (=the possessive genitive, and akin to the subjective, sense 15).

this:
OED II. Demonstrative determiner. 5.d. Referring to something as known, talked
about, or inferred; esp. (colloquial) to something now in vogue or recently
introduced. Also, the present or existing.

church:
OED 6. Frequently (esp. in later use) with capital initial. a. Chiefly with the.
The ecclesiastical and clerical organization of Christianity, or of a particular
large body of Christians (such as a nation or denomination), as exercising
religious authority and upholding ecclesiastical law. Also: the clergy and
officials of this organization collectively or as a corporation owning property,
collecting dues, etc., and (esp. in early use) as an estate of the realm.
In this sense the Church is sometimes opposed to the State or the political
organization, the civil government.

was <be:
OED I. Without required complement: To have or take place in the world of 
fact, to exist, occur, happen.

the: 
OED A.I. Definite article (determiner). Refering to an individual item (or
items). 17.b. With the superlative or ordinal as head of the noun phrase.

first:
OED A.adj. That is before all others; earliest in time or serial order, foremost
in position, rank, or importance. 

thing:
OED 3.a. That with which one is concerned (in action, speech, or thought); an
affair, business, concern, matter, subject; pl. affairs, concerns, matters. (In
early use sometimes sing. in collective sense.)

which:
OED 8.a Introducing a clause defining or restricting the antecedent and thus
completing the sense. Regularly so used after the antecedent that, or after a
preposition; in other cases the more regular relative is that.

caused <cause: (v.)
OED 1.a. transitive. To be the cause of; to effect, bring about, produce,
induce, make.

me:
OED A. pron. The objective case of the first personal pronoun I pron.,
representing the Old English accusative and dative.

to:
OED B.I. With infinitive in adverbial relation.

enter:
OED I. Abstract and non-physical senses.
1.a. intransitive. With into, in. To take on a specified role, commitment,
relationship, etc.; to assume the duties and responsibilities of a particular
office or position.

into:
OED 3. In reference to non-physical realms, regions of thought, departments or
faculties of the mind, etc., treated as having extension or content.

consideration:
OED 2.a. The keeping of a subject before the mind; attentive thought,
reflection, meditation.

whether:
OED II. conj. 7. By suppression of the second alternative, whether comes to
introduce a simple indirect question, and becomes the ordinary sign of indirect
interrogation =IF conj.9.

as:
OED 9.a. Introducing a clause modifying the whole main clause or some part other
than its predicate: in accordance with what (is); in the way that. 

all:
OED 2. With a plural noun, a plural personal or anaphoric pronoun, or a noun
phrase or collective noun with plural agreement. The whole number of individual
components or instances of, without exception; the entire number of.

your: 
OED B. adj. The possessive adjective corresponding to ye, you.
1.a. Belonging or relating to the person or people being addressed; which you
have, hold, or possess.

published: (adj.)
OED 1.a. Formerly: public; carried out openly; celebrated, noted, notorious;
(obsolete). Also: declared, announced; (of a book, a musical composition, etc.)
that has been prepared and issued for public sale, distribution, or readership;
(of information) made generally known, publicly announced.

books <book: (n.)
OED 1.a. A portable volume consisting of a series of written, printed, or
illustrated pages bound together for ease of reading.

and: (conj.)
OED A.I. Coordinating. Introducing a word, phrase, clause, or sentence, which is
to be taken side by side with, along with, or in addition to, that which
precedes it.

writings <writing: (n.)
OED 7.a. A written composition; frequently plural, the work or works of an
author or group of authors; literay production.

peremptorily: (adv.)
OED 5. So as to (finally) settle or decide a matter, question, etc.; decisively,
conclusively; so as to preclude question, doubt, or alteration; definitely. Now
rare.

maintain: (v.)
OED 3.b. With clause: to affirm, assert, or contend (that). With object and
infinitive (now somewhat archaic): to assert (something) to be (etc.); also in
passive.

every: 
OED. A. adj. (attibutive) (in later use, determiner). Used as a universal
quantifier with a singular noun.
1. Used with distributive meaning, as an equivalent to all (with a plural noun)
with collective meaning.

Christian: 
OED A. adj. 1.a. Of persons and communities: Believing, professing, or belonging
to the religion of Christ.

man:
OED I.1. A human being.
b. As a general or indefinite designation, esp. with determiners such as
every, any, no, etc., and in plural, esp. with all, any, some, many, few, etc.:
a person.

fearing <fear: (v.)
OED 6. To regard with reverence and awe; to revere. Now only with God as object;
formerly in wider sense.

God:
OED 5. Especially in Judaism, Christianity, and Islam: the Supreme Being,
regarded as the creator and ruler of the universe.

stand: (v.)
OED 9.b. fig. To remain steadfast, firm, secure, or the like. Also with
adjective or adverb.
Simon says: present subjunctive

bound: (adj.2)
OED 7.c. With infinitive: Compelled, obliged; under necessity (esp. logical or
moral); fated, certain; also in U.S. determined, resolved (sa. to go, etc.).

to:
OED B.I. With infinitive in adverbial relation.

join: (v.)
OED 3. To put together, combine, unite (immaterial things, or one with or to
another or a person).

with: (prep.)
OED 19. Senses expressing accompaniment or addition.

you:
OED A. pron. The objective case of the second personal plural pronoun YE pron.,
representing the Old English accusative and dative.

for:
OED III.7.a. In defence or support of; in favour of, on the side of. Opposed to
against. Often predicatively.

the: 
OED A.I Definite article (determiner). Refering to an individual item (or
items).

furtherance:
OED 1. the fact or state of being furthered or helped forward; the action of
helping forward; advancement, aid, assistance. Also concrete a means or source
of help.

of:
OED XII. Expressing the relationship of the objective genitive.
41. After a noun of action.

that:
OED II.6. As antecedent to a relative (pron. or adv.) expressed or understood.
a. Of a thing, in general sense: that that, that which = the thing which, what;
so that whereby, wherein, wherewith, whence, etc.

which:
OED 8.a Introducing a clause defining or restricting the antecedent and thus
completing the sense. Regularly so used after the antecedent that, or after a
preposition; in other cases the more regular relative is that.

ye:
OED A. pron. The subjective case of the second person plural pronoun. Now
archaic or regional.

term:
OED 2.b. With complement, or in clauses with as. To give a particular or
specified name to; to name, call, designate.

the: 
OED 3.a. Before a noun denoting a thing or person that is unique or considered
to be unique, or of which there is only one at a time (e.g. the sun, the earth,
the sea, the sky, the air, the world, the universe, the Almighty, the Lord, the
Saviour, the Devil, the Emperor, the Pope, the Net, the Web, etc.).

Lord's <Lord:
OED 6.b. (A title or name for) Jesus. Frequently with the. Also in Lord Jesus
(Christ) or Lord Christ.

discipline:
OED 10.a. The system by which the practice of a church, as distinguished from
its doctrine, is regulated; the ecclesiastical laws and customs relating to the
religious and moral life of the Church; spec. the ecclesiastical polity adopted
by Presbyterian and Independent churches in the 16th and 17th centuries (now
historical).


>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>

>> 0.1.5
Wherein I must plainly confess unto you,
    that 
        before I examined your sundry declarations in that behalf,
    it could not settle in my head to think,
        but that undoubtedly such number of otherwise right well-affected and 
        most religiously inclined minds had some marvellous reasonable
        inducements
            which led them with so great earnestness that way.

wherein:
OED 3.a. In which (matter, fact, action, condition, etc.); in respect of which.

I: (pron.)
OED A. pron. The subjective case of the first person singular pronoun.

must:
OED 3. In the present tense.
a. Expressing necessity: am (is, are) obliged or required to; have (has) to; it
is necessary that (I, you, he, it, etc.) should.

plainly: 
OED 4. Without duplicity or reserve; candidly, frankly; openly, honestly.

confess:
OED 1.a. transitive. To declare or disclose (something which one has kept or
allowed to remain secret as being prejudicial or inconvenient to oneself); to
acknowledge, own, or admit (a crime, charge, fault, weakness, or the like). Also
absol.

unto:
OED 2.a. In the direction of; directed towards; =TO prep. 2.

you:
OED A. pron. The objective case of the second personal plural pronoun YE pron.,
representing the Old English accusative and dative.

that:
OED I.1.a. Introducing a dependent substantive-clause, as subject, object, or
other element of the principal clause, or as complement of a n. or adj., or in
apposition with a n. therein.
    
before:
OED 7.a. At, in, or to a time earlier than (a point in time, a date, or an
event).

I:
OED A. pron. The subjective case of the first person singular pronoun.

examined <examine: (v.)
OED 3.a. transitive. To seek understanding or knowledge of (a subject,
situation, etc.) through careful consideration or critical discussion; to
inquire into the truth or falsehood of (a proposition, statement, etc.); to
investigate, analyse, study.

your:
OED B. adj. The possessive adjective corresponding to ye, you.

sundry:
OED 6.a. Of various kinds; a variety of; varied, diverse, manifold. Now esp. of
items or people gathered or considered together; of various types or from
diverse sources; miscellaneous.

declarations <declaration:
OED 3.a. The action of stating, telling, setting forth, or announcing openly,
explicitly or formally; positive statement or assertion; an assertion,
announcement or proclamation in emphatic, solemn, or legal terms.

in that behalf <behalf:
OED 2.c. in this (also that) behalf: in respect of, in regard to, in reference 
to this or that; in this or that matter, or aspect of the matter. Archaic.

it:
OED A.I.1. The thing previously mentioned, implied, or easily identified.
a. As subject or subject complement.

could <can:
OED 10.a. Expressing physical or mental ability: was able to, knew how to; had
the power, ability, or capacity to.

not:
OED A.I.4. Negating verbs. Following an auxiliary verb (and to have whether 
auxiliary or not).

settle:
OED 5. To fix, implant (something) in (a person's heart, mind, etc.). Obsolete.
 
in:
OED 1.a. Of place or position in space or anything having material extension:
Within the limits or bounds of, within (any place or thing).

my: 
OED A. adj. The possessive adjective corresponding to I pron.

head: 
OED 2.a. The head considered as the centre of mental activity; the seat of the
faculties; a person's mind. Often contrasted with heart as the seat of the
emotions; also sometimes contrasted with hands, representing manual labour.

to:
OED B.I. With infinitive in adverbial relation.

think:
OED 1. transitive. To form or hold in the mind (an idea, image, or intuition);
to carry out (something) as mental operation.

        but that undoubtedly such number of otherwise right well-affected and 
        most religiously inclined minds had some marvellous reasonable
        inducements
            which led them with so great earnestness that way.







>> 0.1.6
But when once,
    as near as my slender ability would serve,
I had with travail and care performed that part of the Apostle's advice and
consul,
    whereby he willeth to try all things,
and was come at the length so far,
    that there only remaineth the other clause to be satisfied,
    wherein he concludeth 
        what good is must be held;
there was in my poor understanding no remedy, 
but to set down this as my final resolution:
    surely the present form of church-government,
        which the laws of this land have established,
    is such,
        as no law of God, nor reason of man, hath hitherto been of force
        sufficient to prove they do ill,
        who to the uttermost of their power withstand the alteration thereof;
    contrariwise, the other,
        which 
            instead of it we are required to accept,
        is only by error and misconceit named the ordinance of Jesus Christ,
        no one proof as yet brought forth,
            whereby it may clearly appear to be so.
    
>> 0.1.7
The explication of which two things
     I have here thought good to offer into your own hands,
     heartily beseeching you even by the meekness of Jesus Christ,
         whom I trust ye love;
     that,
         as ye tender the peace and quietness of this church,
             if there be in you that gracious humility 
                 which hath ever been the crown and glory of a Christianly-
                 disposed mind,
             if your own souls, hearts, and consciences
                 (the sound integrity whereof can but hardly stand with the
                 refusal of truth in personal respects)
             be,
                 as I doubt not but they are,
             things most dear and precious unto you:
     let "not the faith 
         which ye have in our Lord Jesus Christ"
     be blemished "with partialities",
     regard not who it is that speaketh, but weigh what is spoken.

>> 0.1.8
Think not 
    that ye read the words of one
        who bendeth himself as an adversary against the truth
            which ye have already embraced;
but the words of one
    who desires even to embrace together with you the selfsame truth,
        if it be the truth;
and for that cause
    (for no other, God he knoweth)
hath undertaken the burdensome labour of this painful kind of conference.

>> 0.1.9
    For the plainer access thereunto,
let it be lawful for me to rip up to the very bottom,
    how and by whom this discipline was planted,
    at such time as this age we live in began to make first trial thereof.



==========================================================================
Preface II
The first establishment of new discipline by Mr. Calvin’s industry in the 
Church of Geneva; and the beginning of strife about it amongst ourselves.

>> 0.2.1
A founder it had,
    whom,
        for mine own parts,
     I think incomparably the wisest man
        that ever the French church did enjoy,
        since the hour it enjoyed him.

>> 0.2.2
His bringing up was in the study of the civil law.

>> 0.2.3
Divine knowledge he gathered,
    not by hearing or reading so much,
    as by teaching others.

>> 0.2.4
    For,
        though thousands were debtors to him,
            as touching knowledge in that kind;
    yet he to none but only to God,
        the author of that most blessed fountain, the Book of Life,
        and the admirable dexterity of wit,
    together with the helps of other learning 
        which were his guides:
    till being occasioned to leave France,
he fell at the length upon Geneva;
    which city the bishop and clegy had a little before
        (as some do affirm)
    forsaken,
        being of likelihood frightened with the people's sudden attempt for
        abolishment of popish religion:
            the event of which enterprise 
                they thought it not safe for themselves to wait for in that 
                place.

>> 0.2.5
    At the coming of Calvin thither,
the form of their civil regiment was popular,
    as it continueth at this day:
neithr king, nor duke, nor nobleman of any power or authority over them,
but officers chosen by the people yearly out of themselves,
    to order all things with public consent.

>> 0.2.6
    For spiritual government,
they had no laws at all agreed upon,
but did what the pastors of their souls by persuasion could win them unto.

>> 0.2.7
Calvin,
    being admitted one of their preachers, and a divinity reader amongst them,
considered how dangerous it was
    that the whole estate of that church should hang still on so slender a 
    thread
        as the liking of an ignorant multitude is,
            if it have the power to change whatsoever itself listeth.

>> 0.2.8
Wherefore
    taking unto him two of the other ministers for more countenance of the 
    action,
    (albeit the rest were all against it,)
they moved,
and in the end persuaded 
    with much ado,
the people to bind themselves by solemn oath,
    first never to admit the Papacy amongst them again;
    and secondly,
        to live in obedience unto such orders
            concerning the exercise of their religion and the form of their 
            ecclesiastical government,
        as those their true and faithful ministers of God's word had agreeably 
        to scripture set down for that end and purpose.

>> 0.2.9
    When these things began to be put in ure,
the people also,
    (what causes moving them thereunto, themselves best know)
began to repent them of that they had done,
    and irefully to champ upon the bit
        they had taken into their mouths;
    the rather,
    for that they grew by means of this innovation into dislike with some 
    churches near about them,
        the benifit of whose good friendship their state could not well lack.

>> 0.2.10
It was the manner of those times
    (whether through men's desire to enjoy alone the glory of their own
     enterprises, 
     or else because the quickness of their occasions required present dispatch;
     so it was,)
that every particular church did that within itself,
    which some few of their own thought good,
        by whom the rest were all directed.

>> 0.2.11
Such number of churches then being,
    though free within themselves,
yet small, common conference beforehand might have eased them of much after
trouble.

>> 0.2.12
But a greater inconvenience it bred,
that every later endeavoured to be certain degrees more removed from conformity 
with the Church of Rome,
    than the rest before had been:
    whereupon grew marvellous great dissimilitudes,
        and by reason thereof,
    jealousies, heart-burnings, jars and discords amongst them.

>> 0.2.13
Which,
    notwithstanding,
might have easily been prevented,
    if the orders,
        which every church did think fit and convenient for itself,
    had not so peremptorily been established under that high commanding form,
        which tendered them unto the people,
            as things everlastingly required by the law of that Lord of lords,
            against whose statues there is no exception to be taken.

>> 0.2.14
For by this mean it came to pass,
    that one church could not but accuse and condemn another of disobedience to
    the will of Christ,
        in those things where manifest difference was between them:
    whereas the selfsame orders allowed,
    but yet established in more wary and suspense manner,
        as being to stand in force 
            till God should give the opportunity of some general conference
                what might be best for every of them afterwards to do;
    this 
        I say
    had both prevented all occasion of just dislike
        which others might take,
    and reserved a greater liberty unto the authors themselves
        of entering into farther consulation afterwards.

>> 0.2.15
Which
    though never so necessary
they could not easily now admit,
    without some fear of derogration from their credit:
and therefore that 
    which once they had done,
they became for ever after resolute to maintain.

>> 0.2.16
Calvin therefore and the other two his associates,
    stiffly refusing to administer the holy communion to such
        as would not quietly,
            without contradition and murmur,
        submit themselves unto the orders
            which their solemn oath had bound them to obey,
were in that quarrel banished the town.

>> 0.2.17
    A few years after
        (such was the levity of that people,)
    the places of one or two of their ministers being fallen void,
they were not before so willing to be rid of their learned pastor,
as now importunate to obtain him again from them
    who had given him entertainment,
    and which were loath to part with him,
        had not unresistable earnestness been used.

>> 0.2.18
One of the town ministers 
    that saw
        in which way the people were bent for the revocation of Calvin,
gave him notice of their affection in this sort.

>> 0.2.19
    "The Senate of two hundred being assembled,
they all crave Calvin.
The next day a general convocation.
They cry in like sort again all, 
    we will have Calvin, that good and learned man, Christ's minister;
This", saith he,
    "when I understood,
I could not choose but praise God,
nor was I able to judge otherwise than 
    that 'this was the Lord's doing and that it is marvellous in our eyes,'
    and that 'the stone 
        which the builders refused
    was now made the head of the corner.'"

>> 0.2.20
The other two 
    whom they had thrown out,
    (together with Calvin,)
they were content should enjoy their exile.

>> 0.2.21
Many causes might lead them to be more desirous of him.

>> 0.2.22
First, his yielding unto them in one thing might happily put them in hope,
    that time would breed the like easiness of condescending further unto them.

>> 0.2.23
For in his absence he had persuaded them,
    with whom he was able to prevail,
that
    albeit himself did better like of common bread to be used in the Eucharist,
    yet the other they rather should accept,
        than cause any trouble in the church about it.

>> 0.2.24
    Again,
they saw that the name of Calvin waxed every day abroad,
    and that together with his fame,
their infamy was spread,
    which had so rashly and childishly ejected him.

>> 0.2.25
Besides,
it was not unlikely 
    but that his credit in the world might many ways stand the poor town in 
    great stead:
        as the truth is,
        their minister's foreign estimation hitherto hath been the best stake in
        their hedge.

>> 0.2.26
But whatsoever secret respects were likely to move them,
    for contenting of their minds Calvin returned
        (as it had been another Tully)
    to his old home.

>> 0.2.27
He ripely considered
    how gross a thing it were for men of his quality,
        wise and grave men,
    to live with such a multitude,
    and to be tenants at will under them,
    as their ministers,
    both himself and others,
    had been.

>> 0.2.28
    For the remedy of which inconvenience,
he gave them plainly to understand,
    that 
        if he did become their teacher again,
    they must be content to observe a complete form of discipline,
        which both they and also their pastors should now be solemnly sworn to 
        observe for ever after.

>> 0.2.29
Of which discipline the main and principal parts were these:
    a standing ecclesiastical court to be established;
    perpetual judges in that court to be their ministers;
    others of the people to be annually chosen
        (twice so many in number as they)
    to be judges together with them in the same court:
    these two sorts to have the care of all men's manners,
        power of determining all kind of ecclesiastical causes,
        and authority to convent, to control, to punish,
            as far as with excommunication, 
        whomsoever they should think worth,
            none either small or great excepted.

>> 0.2.30
This device I see not how the wisest at that time living could have bettered,
    if we duly consider 
        what the present estate of Geneva did then require.

>> 0.2.31
For their bishop and his clergy being
    (as it is said)
departed from them by moonlight,
    or howsoever, being departed,
to choose in his room any other bishop, had been a thing altogether
impossible.

>> 0.2.32
And for the ministers themselves to seek 
    that themselves alone might have coercive power over the whole church,
would perhaps have been hardly construed at that time.

>> 0.2.33
    But when so frank an offer was made,
        that for every one minister there should be two of the people to sit and
        give voice in the ecclesiastical consistory,
what inconvenience could they easily find
    which themselves might not be able always to remedy?

>> 0.2.34
Howbeit
    (as evermore the simpler sort are,
         even when they see no apparent cause,
     jealous notwithstanding over the secret intents and purposes of wiser men,)
this proposition of his did somewhat trouble them.

>> 0.2.35
Of the ministers themselves
    which had stayed behind in the city 
        when Calvin was gone,
some,
    upon knowledge of the people's earnest intent to recall him to his place 
    again,
had beforehand given their letters of submission,
and assured him of their allegiance for ever after,
    if it should like him to hearken unto that public suit.

>> 0.2.36
    But yet misdoubting what might happen,
        if this discipline did go forward;
they objected against it
    the example of other reformed churches living quietly and orderly without
    it.

>> 0.2.37
Some of chiefest place and countenance amongst the laity professed with greater
stomach their judgment,
    that such a discipline was little better than popish tyranny disguised and
    tendered unto them under a new form.

>> 0.2.38
This sort,
    it may be,
had some fear,
    that the filling up of the seats in the consistory with so great a number of
    laymen was but to please the minds of the people,
        to the end they might think their own sway somewhat;
        but when things came to trial of practice,
    their pastors' learning would be at all times of force to over-persuade
    simple men,
        who 
            knowing the time of their own presidentship to be but short
        would always stand in fear of their ministers' perpetual authority:
    and 
        among the ministers themselves,
    one being so far in estimation above the rest,
    the voices of the rest were likely to be given for the most part
    respectively,
        with a kind of secret dependency and awe:
    so that in show a marvellous indifferently composed senate ecclesiastical 
    was to govern,
    but in effect one only man should,
        as the spirit and soul of the residue,
    do all in all.

>> 0.2.39
But what did these vain surmises boot?

>> 0.2.40
Brought they were to so strait an issue,
    that of two things they must choose one:
    namely,
        wether they would 
            to their endless disgrace, with ridiculous lightness
        dismiss him
            whose restitution they had in so impotent manner desired;
        or else condescend unto that demand,
            wherein he was resolute either to have it, or to leave them.

>> 0.2.40
They thought it better to be somewhat hardly yoked at home,
    than forever abroad discredited.

>> 0.2.41
Wherefore in the end those orders were on all sides assented unto:
    with no less alacrity of mind 
        than cities unable to hold out longer are wont to show,
        when they take conditions 
            such as it liketh him to offer them
                which hath them in the narrow straits of advantage.

>> 0.2.42
Not many years were over-passed,
before these twice-sworn men adventured to give their last and hottest assault
unto to the fortress of the same discipline;
    childishly granting by common consent of their whole senate,
        and that under their town seal,
    a relaxation to one Bertelier,
        whom the Eldership had excommunicated:
    further also decreeing,
        with strange absurdity,
    that to the same Senate it should belong to give final judgment in matter of
    excommunication,
    and to absolve whom it pleased them:
    clean contrary to their own former deeds and oaths.

>> 0.2.42
    The report of which decree being forthwith brought unto Calvin;
    "Before," 
saith he, 
    "this decreee take place, 
    either my blood or banishment shall sign it."

>> 0.2.43
Again,
    two days before the communion should be celebrated,
his speech was publickly to like effect:
    "kill me 
         if ever this hand do reach forth the things
             that are holy 
         to them
             whom the Church hath judged dispisers."

>> 0.2.44
Whereupon,
    for fear of tumult,
the forenamed Bertelier was by his friends advised for that time not to use the 
liberty
    granted him by the Senate,
nor to present himself in the Church,
    till they saw somewhat further
        what would ensue.

>> 0.2.45
    After the communion quietly ministered,
    and some likelihood of peaceful ending of these troubles without any more 
    ado,
    that very day in the afternoon,
    besides all men's expectation,
    concluding his ordinary sermon,
he telleth them,
    that because he neither had learned nor taught to strive with such 
        as are in authority,
    "therefore," saith he,
    "the case so standing as now it doth,
    let me use the words of the Apostle unto your,
        'I commend you to God and the word of his grace;'"
and so bade them heartily all adieux.
    
>> 0.2.46
It sometimes cometh to pass,
   that the readiest way 
       which a wise man hath to conquer, 
   is to fly.

>> 0.2.47
This voluntary and unexpected mention of sudden departure caused presently the
Senate
    (for according to their wonted ways they still continued only constant in
    unconstancy)
to gather themselves together,
and for a time to suspend their own creed,
    leaving things to proceed as before
        till they had heard the judgment of four Helvetian cities concerning the 
        matter
            which was in strife.

>> 0.2.48
This to have done at the first 
    before they gave assent unto any order
had showed some wit and discretion in them:
but now to do it was as much as to say in effect,
    that they would play their parts on a stage.

>> 0.2.49
Calvin therefore dispatched with all expedition his letters unto some principal
pastor in every of those cities,
    craving earnestly at their hands,
        to respect this cause as a thing
            whereupon the whole state of religion and piety in that church did
            so much depend,
        that God and all good men were now inevitably certain to be trampled
        under foot,
            unless those four cities by their good means might be brought to 
            give sentence with the minsters of Geneva,
                when the cause should be brought before them:
            yea so to give it,
                that two things it might effectually contain;
                the one an absolute approbation of the discipline of Geneva as 
                consonant unto the word of God,
                    without any cautions, qualifications, ifs or ands;
                the other an earnest admonition not to innovate or change the
                same.

>> 0.2.50
His vehement request as touching both points was satisfied.

>> 0.2.51
For albeit the said Helvetian churches did never as yet observe that discipline,
    nevertheless,
the Senate of Genave having required their judgment concerning these three
questions:
    First, "After what manner, by God's commandament, according to the 
    scripture and unspotted religion, excommunication is to be exercised:"
    Secondly, "whether it may not be exercised some other way than by the
    consistory:"
    Thirdly, "what the use of their churches was to do in this case:"
answer was returned from the said churches,
    "that they had heard already of those consistory laws,
     and did acknowledge them to be godly ordinaces drawing towards the
     prescript of the word of God;
     for which cause they did not think it good for the Church of Geneva by
     innovation to change the same, but rather to keep them as they were."
    
>> 0.2.52
Which answer,
    although not answering unto the former demands,
    but respecting what Master Calvin had judged requisite for them to answer,
was notwithstanding accepted without further reply:
in as much as they plainly saw,
    that
        when stomach doth strive with wit,
    the match is not equal.

>> 0.2.53
And so the heat of their former contentions began to slake.

>> 0.2.54
    The present inhabitants of Geneva,
I hope,
    will not take it in evil part,
        that the faultiness of their people heretofore is by us so far forth
        laid open,
        as their own learned guides and pastors have found necessary to discover 
        it unto the word.

>> 0.2.55
For out of their books and writings it is that I have collected this whole
narration,
    to the end it might thereby appear in what sort amongst them that discipline 
    was planted,
        for which so much contention is raised amongst ourselves.

>> 0.2.56
The reason 
    which moved Calvin herein to be so earnest,
was,
    as Beza himself testifieth,
"for that he saw how needful these bridles were,
    to be put in the jaws of that city."

>> 0.2.57
That which by wisdom he saw to be requisite for that people,
was by as great wisdom compassed.

>> 0.2.58
But wise men are men, and the truth is truth.

>> 0.2.59
That which Calvin did for establishment of his discipline,
seemeth more commendable than that 
    which he did for the countenancing of it established.

>> 0.2.60
Nature worketh in us all a love to our own counsels.

>> 0.2.61
The contradition of others is a fan to inflame that love.

>> 0.2.62
Our love set on fire to maintain that 
    which once we have done,
sharpeneth the wit to dispute, to argue, and by all means to reason for it.

>> 0.2.63
Wherefore a marvel it were
    if a man of so great capacity,
        having such incitements to make him desirous of all kind of furtherances
        unto his cause,
    could espy in the whole scripture of God nothing 
        which might breed at the least a probable opinion of likelihood,
            that divine authority itself was the same way somewhat inclinable.

>> 0.2.64
And all 
    which the wit even of Calvin was able from thence to draw,
        by sifting the very utmost sentence and syllable,
is no more than 
    that certain speeches there are
        which to him did seem to intimate
            that all Christian churches ought to have their Elderships endued 
            with power of excommunication,
            and that a part of those elderships every where should be chosen out
            from amongst the laity
                after that form 
                    which himself had framed Geneva unto.

>> 0.2.65
But what argument are ye able to show,
    whereby it was ever proved by Calvin,
that any one sentence of Scripture doth necessarily enforce these things,
    or the rest
        wherein your opinion concurreth with his 
    against the orders of your own church?

>> 0.2.66
We should be injurious unto virtue itself,
    if we did derogate from them
        whom their industry hath made great.

>> 0.2.67
Two things of principla moment there are
    which have deservedly procured him honour throughout the world:
        the one his exceeding pains in composing the Institutions of Christian
        Religion;
        the other his no less industrious travails for exposition of Holy
        Scripture according unto the same Institutions.

>> 0.2.68
    In which two things whosoever
        they were
    that after him bestowed their labour,
he gained the advantage of prejudice against them, if they gainsayed;
    and of glory above them, if they consented.

>> 0.2.69
His writings
    published after the question about that discipline was once begun
omit not any the least occasion of extolling the use and singular necessity 
thereof.

>> 0.2.70
Of what account the Master of Sentences was in the Church of Rome,
the same and more amongst the preachers of reformed churches Calvin had
purchased;
    so that the perfectest divines were judged they,
        which were skillfullest in Calvin's writings.

>> 0.2.71
His books almost the very canon to judge both doctrine and discipline by.

>> 0.2.72
French churches,
    both under others abroad and at home in their own country,
all cast acording to that mould
    which Calvin had made.

>> 0.2.73
The Church of Scotland in erecting the fabric of their reformation took the 
self-same pattern.

>> 0.2.74
Till at length the discipline,
    which was at the first so weak,
        that without the staff of their approbation,
            who were not subject unto it themselves,
        it had not brought others under subjection,
began now to challenge universal obedience,
and to enter into open conflict with those very churches,
    which in desperate extremity had been relievers of it.

>> 0.2.75
To one of those churches 
    which lived in most peaceable sort,
    and abounded as well with men for their learning in other professions
    singular,
    as also with divines
        whose equals were not elsewhere to be found,
a church ordered by Gualter's discipline,
    and not by that
        which Geneva adoreth;
unto this church,
    the Church of Heidelberg,
there cometh one
    who craving leave to dispute
publicly defendeth
    with open disdain of their government,
that 
    "to a minister with his Eldership power is given by the law of God to
    excommunicate whomsoever,
    yea even kings and princes themselve."
    
>> 0.2.76
Here were the seeds sown of that controversey
    which sprang up between Beza and Erastus
about the matter of excommunication,
    whether 
        there ought to be in all churches an Eldership having power to
        excommunicate,
        and a part of that eldership to be of necessity certain chosen out from
        amongst the laity for that purpose.

>> 0.2.77
In which disputation they have,
    as to me it seemeth,
divided very equally the truth between them;
Beza most truly maintaining the necessity of excommunication,
Erastus as truly the non-necessity of lay elders to be ministers thereof.

>> 0.2.78
    Amongst ourselves,
there was in King Edward's days some question moved by reason of a few men's 
scupulosity touching certain things.

>> 0.2.79
        And beyond seas,
    of them 
        which fled in the days of Queen Mary,
    some contenting themselves abroad with the use of their own service-book 
    at home authorized before their departure out of the realm,
    others liking better the common prayer-book of the Church of Geneva 
    translated,
those smaller contentions before begun were by this mean somewhat increased.

>> 0.2.80
    Under the happy reign of her Majesty 
        which now is,
the greatest matter a while contented for was the wearing of the cap and
surplice,
    till there came Admonitions directed unto the high court of Parliament,
        by men
            who concealing their names thought it glory enough to discover their
            minds and affections,
                which now were universally bent even against all the orders and
                laws,
                    wherein this church is found unconformable to the platform
                    of Geneva.

>> 0.2.81
    Concerning the defenders of which Admonitions,
all 
    that I mean to say 
is but this:
    there will come a time
        when three words uttered with charity and meekness shall receive a far
        more blessed reward
            than three thousand volumes written with disdainful sharpness of 
            wit.

>> 0.2.82
But the manner of men's writing must not alienate our hearts from the truth,
    if it appear they have the truth;
        as the followers of the same defender do think he hath;
        and in that persuasion they follow him,
            no otherwise than himself doth Calvin, Beza, and others,
                with the like persuasion 
                    that they in this cause have the truth.

>> 0.2.83
    We being as fully persuaded otherwise,
it resteth 
    that some kind of trial be used to find out 
        which part is in error.


==========================================================================
Preface III 
By what means so many of the people are trained unto the liking of that 
discipline.

>> 0.3.1
The first mean 
    whereby nature teacheth men to judge good from evil,
        as well in laws as in other things,
is the force of their own discretion.

>> 0.3.2
Hereunto therefore St. Paul referreth oftentimes his own speech
    to be considered of by them 
        that heard him:

>> 0.3.3
"I speak as to them
    which have understanding,
judge ye 
    what I say."

>> 0.3.4
    Again afterward,
"Judge in yourselves,
    is it comely 
        that a woman pray uncovered?"

>> 0.3.5
The exercise of this kind of judgment our Saviour requireth in the Jews.

>> 0.3.6
In them of Berea the Scripture commendeth it.

>> 0.3.7
    Finally,
whatsoever we do,
    if our own secret judgment consent not unto it as fit and good to be done,
the doing of it to us is sin,
    although the thing itself be allowable.

>> 0.3.8
St. Paul's rule therefore generally is:
    "Let every man in his own heart be fully conviced of that thing
         which he either alloweth or doth."

>> 0.3.9
Some things are so familiar and plain,
    that truth from falsehood, and good from evil, is most easily discerned in
    them,
        even by men of no deep capacity.

==================================
Preface, IV.2

nothing less:
OED B.3(adv.) least of all things, anything rather (than the thing in question)

==================================
Preface, IV.3

    Were it for the glory of God and the good of his Church
indeed that the clergy should be left even as bare as the Apostles 
    when they had neither staff nor scrip,
that God,
    which should lay upon them the condition of his Apostles,
would
    I hope
endue them with the selfsame affection 
    which was in that holy Apostle,
        whose words 
            concerning his own right virtuous contentment of heart,
        "as how well how to want, as how to abound,"
        are a most fit episcopal emprese.


==================================
Preface, IV.4

Thirdly,
    whereas it is the error of the common multitude to consider only
        what hath been of old,
            and if the same were well, to see 
                whether still it continue;
            if not, to condemn that presently which is,
                and never to search upon
                    what ground or consideration the change might grow:
such rudeness cannot be in you so well born with,
    whom learning and judgment hath enabled much more soundly to discern
        how far the times of the Church and the orders thereof may alter without
        offence.

True it is,
    the ancienter, the better ceremonies of religion are;
howbeit,
    not absolutely true and without exception:
    but true only so far forth as those different ages do agree in the state of
    those things,
        for which at the first those rites, orders, and ceremonies, were
        instituted.

state of things:
OED 5.a. the way in which events or circumstances stand disposed (at a
particular time or within a particular sphere)

Here ... agree [in the state of those things], not agree in [the state of those
things]

    In the Apostles' times
that was harmless, 
    which being now revived would be scandalous;
    as their oscula sancta.

Those feasts of charity,
    which being instituted by the Apostles,
were retained in the Church long after,
are not now thought any where needful.

What man is there of understanding,
    unto whom it is not manifest 
        how the way of providing for the clergy by tithes,
        the device of almshouses for the poor,
        the sorting out of the people into their several parishes,
        together with sundry other things
            which the Apostles' times could not have,
                (being now established,)
        are much more convenient and fit for the Church of Christ,
            than if the same should be taken away for conformity's sake with the
            ancientest and first times?
    
What [sb] is there of [sth], [prep] [pron] it is not [adj],
how [sth] of [doing sth] for [sth] by [sth], 
[sth] of [sth] for [sb], 
[sth] of [sth] into [sth],  
together with [sth] which [sth] could not [v](being now [pp],) 
are much more [adj] and [adj] for [sth],
than if [sth] should be [pp] for [sth]'s sake with [sth]?

==================================
Preface, IV.5

The orders therefore, 
    which were observed in the Apostles' times,
are not to be urged as a rule universally either suffient or necessary.

    If they be,
    nevertheless on your part 
it still remaineth to be better proved,
    that the form of discipline,
        which ye entitle apostolical,
    was in the Apostles' times exercised.

For of this very thing
ye fail even touching that
    which ye make most account of,
        as being matter of substance in discipline,
    I mean the power of your lay-elders,
        and the difference of your Doctors from the Pastors in all churches.

    So that in sum,
we may be bold to conclude,
    that besides these last times,
        which for insolency, pride, and egregious contempt of all good order,
        are the worst,
    there are none
        wherein ye can truly affirm,
            that the complete form of your discipline, or the substance thereof,
            was practised.

==================================
Preface, IV.6

    The evidence therefore of antiquity failing you,
ye fly to the judgments of such learned men,
    as seem by their writings to be of opinion,
        that all Christian churches should receive your discipline, and abandon
        ours.

==================================
Preface, V.3

in this behalf:
OED 2.c. in respect of, in regard to, in reference to this; in this matter, or
aspect of the matter.

forasmuch as
OED a. In consideration that, seeing that, inasmuch as.

I wish that proof were made by conference in orderly fashion, provided that
(1) Ye take only the plaintiff's or opponent's role;
(2) all issues are throughly and orderly disputed;
(3) Ye agree to choose one man to represent you;
(4) Ye and we agree to write an authorized account afterwards.

    Notwithstanding,
        forasmuch as the cause
            we maintain
        is
            (God be thanked)
        such as needeth not to shun any trial,
    might it please them
        on whose approbation the matter dependeth
    to condescend so far unto you in this behalf,
I wish heartily that proof were made even by solemn conference in orderly and
quiet sort,
    whether you would yourselves be satisfied,
    or else could by satisfying others draw them to your part.

    In this sort to broach my private conceit for the ordering of a public action
I should be loth
    (albeit I do it not otherwise than under correction of them
        whose gravity and wisdom ought in such cases to overrule,)
but that so venturous boldness I see is a thing now general;
and am thereby of good hope,
    that 
        where all men are licensed to offend,
    no man will shew himself a sharp accuser.

broach:
OED 6. To give vent or publicity to; to give out; to begin conversation or
discussion about, introduce, moot.

==================================
Preface, VI.1

I would therefore know,
    whether for the ending of these irksome strifes,
        wherein you and your followers do stand thus formally diveded agasinst
        the authorized guides of this church,
        and the rest of the subject unto their charge;
    whether I say 
        ye be content to refer your cause to any other higher judgment than your
        own,
        or else intend to persist and proceed as ye have begun,
            till yourselves can be persuaded to condemn yourselves.

==================================
Preface, VI.3

Ye will perhaps make answer,
    that 
        being persuaded already as touching the truth of your cause,
    ye are not to hearken unto any sentence,
        no not though Angels should define otherwise,
            as the blessed Apostle's own example teacheth:
again, that men, yea councils, may err;
and that,
    unless the judgment given do satisfy your minds,
    unless it be such as ye can by no further argument oppugn,
    in a word, unless you perceive and acknowledge it yourselves consonant with
    God's word;
to stand unto it not 
    allowing it 
were to sin against your own conscience.

stand to (also unto) it
OED. 76.c to fight stoutly; also, to toil without flagging at painful or severe
labour.




==================================
Book I.III 3

Touching the former,         their           strict keeping of one tenure,
             [law of nature] [natural agents]                     
statute, and law, is spoken of by all, but hath in it more than men have as 
yet attained to know, or perhaps ever shall attain, 
seeing the travail of wading herein is given of God to the sons of men,
that perceiving how much the least thing in the world hath in it more 
than the wisest are able to reach unto, they may by this means
learn humility.

seeing: (conj.)
OED. In view of the fact that; considering that; since.

states <state: 
OED 22.a. A person of high rank, status, or importance; a dignitary; a noble,
lord, or prince; =ESTATE n.3c. Obsolete.



